Title: Python Speedup With Numba
Author: Robert Meredith
Date: 2020/05/17
Category: Python
Tags: python, numba
Slug: python-speed-numba 

# Python Speedup With Numba

Watched an interesting talk from the Virtual Pycon 2020 entitled "Why Is Python So Slow" given by Anthony Shaw.

Youtube video is [here](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=I4nkgJdVZFA) 

So it turns out that as with all these type of statements the real answer about Python speed is that it depends what you are doing..................

So one thing Python is really bad at is tight loops because of the way the code is compiled. So I thought I would have a quick experiment with one of the packages mentioned in the talk.

Numba is a "Just In Time" compiler which "translates Python functions to optimized machine code at runtime using the industry-standard [LLVM](https://llvm.org/) compiler library. Numba-compiled numerical algorithms in Python can approach the speeds of C or FORTRAN. You don't need to replace the Python  interpreter, run a separate compilation step, or even have a C/C++ compiler installed. Just apply one of the  Numba decorators to your Python function, and Numba does the rest. (http://numba.pydata.org).

I wrote a very quick script to do a couple of trivial maths operations and ran it 100 million times. My slow workstation took 16 seconds to run it.

To install numba is just a pip install. To use it is just two lines of code. An import and a decorator as you can see below.

The results were impressive. My trivial programme now ran in 0.2 seconds. 

An interesting quick project and definitely one to remember for the future. Another package that was suggested in the talk that may have the same results was pypy.



```shellscript
import time
from numba import jit


@jit(nopython=True)
def do_some_sums(how_many):
    for i in range(0,how_many):
        x = i * 2.3
        z = x * i


start = time.time()
do_some_sums(100000000)
end = time.time()
print(end - start)
```
